TLA+ Trace validation (#113)
etcd-io/raft: tla/README.md

The correctness of applications based on a consensus algorithm is ensured by two factors: the correctness of the algorithm itself, and the alignment of the implementation with the algorithm. 

The first factor, the correctness of the algorithm, is assured through model checking the specification. The second component, the alignment between the implementation and the algorithm, is fortified through trace validation, which serves to bridge the gap between the model and its implementation.

To ensure the robustness of trace validation, we initially inject multiple trace log points at specific sections in the code where state transitions occur (for example, SendAppendEntries, BecomeLeader, etcd). The trace validation specification leverages these traces as a state space constraint, guiding the state machine to traverse in a manner identical to that of the service.

If a trace suggests a state or transition that the state machine can't accommodate, it indicates a discrepancy between the model and its implementation. In cases where the model has already been verified by the TLC model checker, it's more likely that any issues arise from the implementation rather than the model.

> ## Enabling and Running TLA+ Trace Validation

Reviewer: I would like to check if those scripts work, can provide minimal raft application/instructions I would generate the traces?

Author: I have a refactory on rafttest. Will make another PR for that. In the meanwhile, you can try using example.ndjson.

Author: I add some instructions in README on how to add traces. As discussed with @ahrtr , it would be better to integrate the test to application's test suites (e.g. etcd's robustness test), so I hold on my work on the refactory. But let me know if this would be helpful.

# TLA+ Specification and Trace Validation for Raft Library: A Comprehensive Guide

> This document presents comprehensive guidelines on how to create a TLA+ specification for the Raft library as implemented in `etcd-io/raft`. The distinctive behaviors of this library, such as reconfiguration, set it apart from the original Raft algorithm. A TLA+ specification serves dual purposes: it not only helps verify the correctness of the model but also facilitates model-based trace validation.

Author: Fixed.

3. **CLI**: This is the best option for integration with existing test frameworks and automation. For more information, refer to the [CLI guideline](https://learntla.com/topics/cli.html). You can execute a typical command line to verify etcdraft.tla as shown below. Please ensure that tla2tools.jar and CommunityModules-deps.jar have been downloaded and are available in the current folder before proceeding.

    ```console
    java -XX:+UseParallelGC -Dtlc2.tool.impl.Tool.cdot=true -cp tla2tools.jar:CommunityModules-deps.jar tlc2.TLC -workers auto MCetcdraft.tla -dumpTrace tla MCetcdraft.trace.tla -dumpTrace json MCetcdraft.json -lncheck final
    ```

## TLA+ Model-Based Trace Validation

The correctness of applications based on a consensus algorithm is ensured by two factors: the correctness of the algorithm itself, and the alignment of the implementation with the algorithm. 

The first factor, the correctness of the algorithm, is assured through model checking the specification. The second component, the alignment between the implementation and the algorithm, is fortified through trace validation, which serves to bridge the gap between the model and its implementation.

> To ensure the robustness of trace validation, we initially inject multiple trace log points at specific sections in the code where state transitions occur (for example, SendAppendEntries, BecomeLeader, etcd). The trace validation specification leverages these traces as a state space constraint, guiding the state machine to traverse in a manner identical to that of the service.

Author: Fixed.

> If a trace suggests a state or transition that the state machine can't accommodate, it indicates a discrepancy between the model and its implementation. In cases where the model has already been verified by the TLC model checker, it's more likely that any issues arise from the implementation rather than the model. In other cases where the code change relects expected refactory, we need to update the model accordingly and model checking it before validating traces with the new model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a trace suggests a state or transition that the state machine can't accommodate, it indicates a discrepancy between the model and its implementation. In cases where the model has already been verified by the TLC model checker, it's more likely that any issues arise from the implementation rather than the model. In other cases where the code change reflects expected refactoring, we need to update the model accordingly and model checking it before validating traces with the new model.
```

Author: fixed

## Enable TLA+ Trace Validation

To activate trace collection, build the application using the "with_tla" tag (`go build -tags=with_tla`). The `StartNode` and/or `RestartNode` should be invoked with `Config` and the `TraceLogger` property set to an instance of `TraceLogger` interface. This instance emits tracing events in the correct format.

> Here is any example trace logger using zap.Logger (sampling shall be disabled to ensure all traces are logged)

Author: Fixed.

    Storage:         storage,
    MaxSizePerMsg:   4096,
    MaxInflightMsgs: 256,
    TraceLogger:     &MyTraceLogger{},
  }
  // Set peer list to the other nodes in the cluster.
  // Note that they need to be started separately as well.
  n := raft.StartNode(c, []raft.Peer{{ID: 0x02}, {ID: 0x03}})
```
**Note:** To preserve the causality of events across nodes, run all application instances on the same machine and store traces in the same file. This approach maintains the order of traces in all instances.

## Model Checking TLA+ Spec
The TLA+ spec defines the desired behaviors of the model. To validate the correctness of the model, we need to make sure following commands run enough time (at least hours, depending on how confident we need) without failure.

```console
./validate-model.sh -s ./MCetcdraft.tla -c ./MCetcdraft.cfg 
```

## Validate Collected Traces
With above example trace logger, validate.sh can be used to validate traces parallelly.

```console
./validate.sh -s ./Traceetcdraft.tla -c ./Traceetcdraft.cfg /path/to/traces/*.ndjson
```
By default validate.sh uses all CPU cores to validate the traces. You can also specify the maximum concurrent tasks by `-p` argument. 

> Validating all traces in a fiile can take long time. You can specificy `MAX_TRACE` environment variable to limit the validation only on top `MAX_TRACE` traces in each file.

Author: Fixed.
